[docs] Document the ANALYZE command (#9623)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/latest/api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/cmd_analyze.md

---
title: ANALYZE statement [YSQL]
headerTitle: ANALYZE
linkTitle: ANALYZE
description: Collect statistics about database tables with the ANALYZE statement.

> beta: /latest/faq/general/#what-is-the-definition-of-the-beta-feature-tag

Reviewer: **Questions:**

1. Which version supports ANALYZE on non-temporary tables?
2. Do you want to wait to publish this in conjunction with that release?

No matter what, we should add a note before the examples mentioning which versions support analyzing non-temporary tables, since the current latest release doesn't.

**Using the 2.7.2 release**, I launched a YugabyteDB instance with `bin/yugabyted start --tserver_flags="ysql_beta_features"`, and followed the "Analyze affects query plans" example.

Things went as expected for table creation, population, and the first EXPLAIN. But `ANALYZE test` gave the following output:

```
WARNING:  analyzing non-temporary tables will be ignored
ANALYZE
```

...and my query plan didn't change:

```
                       QUERY PLAN                        
---------------------------------------------------------
 Seq Scan on test  (cost=0.00..102.50 rows=1000 width=8)
   Filter: (b = 1)
(2 rows)
```

And `ANALYZE` with no table specified gave me 71 lines of this:

```
WARNING:  analyzing non-temporary tables will be ignored
```

Author: The feature is introduced by 638f4188da8b3f81a595eea7b7e45f2ed97104ab, I believe it will be released with 2.7.3, though I am not sure about release schedule. It is currently available in master.
What is our practice so far? I do not see any reason to make an exception for this feature.

Reviewer: I wouldn't publish this until it's actually available. Let's get this all ready to go, but not merge until 2.7.3 is going out.

Author: OK, works for me.

menu:
  latest:
    identifier: cmd_analyze
    parent: statements
aliases:

>   - /latest/api/ysql/commands/cmd_analyze/

Reviewer: Do we need an alias for this?

Author: What alias mean here? I used cmd_copy.md as a template, it has alias.

Reviewer: You can delete the aliases section, in that case. (What it does is set up a redirect from any paths you add in the section, all pointing to the current page, but this is only useful if there are links to an existing page, and we need to move that page.)

Author: Done.

isTocNested: true
showAsideToc: true
---

## Synopsis

> ANALYZE collects statistics about the contents of tables in the database, and stores the results in the `pg_statistic` system catalog. Subsequently, the query planner uses these statistics to help determine the most efficient execution plans for queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ANALYZE collects statistics about the contents of tables in the database, and stores the results in the `pg_statistic` system catalog. These statistics help the query planner to determine the most efficient execution plans for queries.
```

> The Yugabyte implementation is based on the framework provided by PostgreSQL, which requires the storage layer to provide random sample of rows of predefined size. The size is calculated based on number of factors, such as data types of included columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The YugabyteDB implementation is based on the framework provided by PostgreSQL, which requires the storage layer to provide a random sample of rows of a predefined size. The size is calculated based on a number of factors, such as the included columns' data types.
```

{{< note title="Note" >}}

> Currently sampling algorithm is not optimized fror a large table. It may take minutes to collect statistics from a table containing several million rows of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sampling algorithm is not currently optimized for large tables. It may take several minutes to collect statistics from a table containing millions of rows of data.
```

{{< /note >}}

{{< note title="Note" >}}

> Currently Yugabyte doesn't run a background job to analyzing the tables like PostgreSQL's autovacuum.
> To collect or update statistics the ANALYZE command should be explicitly executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, YugabyteDB doesn't run a background job like PostgreSQL's autovacuum to analyze the tables.
To collect or update statistics, run the ANALYZE command manually.
```

{{< /note >}}

## Syntax

<ul class="nav nav-tabs nav-tabs-yb">
  <li >
    <a href="#grammar" class="nav-link active" id="grammar-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="grammar" aria-selected="true">
      <i class="fas fa-file-alt" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      Grammar
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="#diagram" class="nav-link" id="diagram-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="diagram" aria-selected="false">
      <i class="fas fa-project-diagram" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      Diagram
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

<div class="tab-content">
  <div id="grammar" class="tab-pane fade show active" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="grammar-tab">
    {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/analyze,table_and_columns.grammar.md" /%}}
  </div>
  <div id="diagram" class="tab-pane fade" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="diagram-tab">
    {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/analyze,table_and_columns.diagram.md" /%}}
  </div>
</div>

## Semantics

### VERBOSE

Enable display of progress messages.

### *table_name*

> Specify the table, optionally schema-qualified, to be analyzed. If not specified, then all regular tables in the current database will be analyzed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table name to be analyzed; may be schema-qualified. Optional. Omit to analyze all regular tables in the current database.
```

### *column_name*

> Specify the list of columns to be analyzed. If not specified, then all columns of the table will be analyzed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List of columns to be analyzed. Optional. Omit to analyze all columns of the table.
```

## Examples

> ### Analyze single table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Analyze a single table
```

```plpgsql
yugabyte=# ANALYZE some_table;
```

```output
ANALYZE
```

> ### Analyze some columns of the table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Analyze specific columns
```

```plpgsql
yugabyte=# ANALYZE some_table(col1, col3);
```

```output
ANALYZE
```

### Analyze multiple tables verbosely

```plpgsql
yugabyte=# ANALYZE VERBOSE some_table, other_table;
```

```output
INFO:  analyzing "public.some_table"
INFO:  "some_table": scanned, 3 rows in sample, 3 estimated total rows
INFO:  analyzing "public.other_table"
INFO:  "other_table": scanned, 3 rows in sample, 3 estimated total rows
ANALYZE
```

### Analyze affects query plans

> In the absence of the statistics optimizer uses hard-coded defaults, such us 1000 for the number of rows in the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the absence of statistics, the optimizer uses hard-coded defaults, such as 1000 for the number of rows in the table.
```

> After ANALYZE number of rows is accurate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After ANALYZE, the number of rows is accurate.
```

> ```output
> yugabyte=# CREATE TABLE test(a int primary key, b int);
> CREATE TABLE
> yugabyte=# INSERT INTO test VALUES (1, 1), (2, 2), (3, 3);
> INSERT 0 3
> yugabyte=# EXPLAIN select * from test where b = 1;
>                        QUERY PLAN
> ---------------------------------------------------------
>  Seq Scan on test  (cost=0.00..102.50 rows=1000 width=8)
>    Filter: (b = 1)
> (2 rows)
> 
> yugabyte=# ANALYZE test;
> ANALYZE
> yugabyte=# EXPLAIN select * from test where b = 1;
>                      QUERY PLAN
> ----------------------------------------------------
>  Seq Scan on test  (cost=0.00..0.31 rows=3 width=8)
>    Filter: (b = 1)
> (2 rows)
> ```

Reviewer: Separating inputs from outputs for copy-paste ease...

````suggestion
```sql
yugabyte=# CREATE TABLE test(a int primary key, b int);
```

```output
CREATE TABLE
```

```sql
yugabyte=# INSERT INTO test VALUES (1, 1), (2, 2), (3, 3);
```

```output
INSERT 0 3
```

```sql
yugabyte=# EXPLAIN select * from test where b = 1;
```

```output
                       QUERY PLAN
---------------------------------------------------------
 Seq Scan on test  (cost=0.00..102.50 rows=1000 width=8)
   Filter: (b = 1)
(2 rows)
```

```sql
yugabyte=# ANALYZE test;
```

```output
ANALYZE
```

```sql
yugabyte=# EXPLAIN select * from test where b = 1;
```

```output
                     QUERY PLAN
----------------------------------------------------
 Seq Scan on test  (cost=0.00..0.31 rows=3 width=8)
   Filter: (b = 1)
(2 rows)
```
````

Author: In that paragraph I wanted to emphasize sequence and continuity of the statements.  
It is OK to rewrite them as statement/output pairs, however in this case I'd prefer to comment each statement, rather than have single text block explanation.
Will rewrite.

{{< note title="Note" >}}

> Yugabyte's query plan nodes (in particular sequential and index scans) were implemented long before we planned to support
> the ANALYZE command and statistics, so planner does not make use of statistics besides number of rows when calculating
> execution costs of those nodes.

Reviewer: No need to explain why, just mention the limitation.
```suggestion
The query planner uses only the number of rows when calculating execution costs of _query plan nodes_ (in particular, sequential and index scans).
```

      Grammar
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="#diagram" class="nav-link" id="diagram-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="diagram" aria-selected="false">
      <i class="fas fa-project-diagram" aria-hidden="true"></i>
      Diagram
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

<div class="tab-content">
  <div id="grammar" class="tab-pane fade show active" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="grammar-tab">
    {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/analyze,table_and_columns.grammar.md" /%}}
  </div>
  <div id="diagram" class="tab-pane fade" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="diagram-tab">
    {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/analyze,table_and_columns.diagram.md" /%}}
  </div>
</div>

## Semantics

### VERBOSE

Enable display of progress messages.

### *table_name*

Specify the table, optionally schema-qualified, to be analyzed. If not specified, then all regular tables in the current database will be analyzed.

### *column_name*

Specify the list of columns to be analyzed. If not specified, then all columns of the table will be analyzed.

## Examples

### Analyze single table

```plpgsql
yugabyte=# ANALYZE some_table;

> ANALYZE

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

```output
ANALYZE
````

```

> ### Analyze some colums of the table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Analyze some columns of the table
```

```plpgsql
yugabyte=# ANALYZE some_table(col1, col3);

> ANALYZE

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

```output
ANALYZE
````

```

### Analyze multiple tables verbosely

```plpgsql

> yugabyte=# ANALYZE VERBOSE some_table, other_table;

Reviewer: ````suggestion
yugabyte=# ANALYZE VERBOSE some_table, other_table;
```

```output
````
